Good morning, everyone.
My name is Ben Trumbull,
and I'm the engineering
manager for Core Data,
and I'm here to begin the
Core Data Best Practices session.
and today we're going to talk
about a number of topics.
We're going to talk about concurrency,
nested context,
and then I'm going to bring
Melissa Turner on stage to
talk to you about performance,
schema design, and search optimization.
So as part of some of these topics,
we're going to talk about using
Core Data with multiple threads,
sharing unsafe changes between contexts,
debugging performance with Instruments,
tuning your model,
and improving your predicate usage.
So first up, concurrency.
So when using Core Data or
really any modeling objects,
there's some challenges
you're going to face.
First is obviously thread safety.
But then we're going to look at some
issues with transactionality when
you have a bunch of changes together.
And of course, you're going to need to
balance that with performance.
So in the past, a lot of people have
done something like this.
They have a bunch of different
contexts together and they
use perform selector to route,
say, a merge notification or some other
method onto the main thread or a
specific thread to get to a context.
This makes us a little sad, though.
So in Lion and iOS 5,
we introduced some new methods and some
new concurrency types for managed object.
And instead of having to trampoline
through perform selector,
you can use perform block
and perform block and wait.
It's going to look a little
bit something like this.
When you create a managed object context,
you'll specify what type of
concurrency you want it to use.
It will manage that itself and then
use perform block to route it tasks.
So there are three concurrency
options you can use in Core Data.
The first one is you can tell managed
object contexts that you want it
to be bounded to the main thread.
And this is great for interacting with
view controllers and other aspects of
the system that are bound to the main
thread or don't really know very much
about Core Data and its concurrency.
And then for a lot of your
background tasks in your own work,
you can use private queue concurrency.
And finally,
there's the confinement concurrency type,
which is basically what people
have been using in the past before
we introduced these new options.
So for the confinement concurrency type,
you're basically required to have a
separate context for every thread,
and managed object context
can only be used on the thread
or queue that created them.
And this is the default legacy option.
So with the confinement type,
everything is going to be
serialized against your work throw.
And you can use either a serialized
dispatch queue or an S operation queue
with a maximum concurrency manually set
to one in addition to a specific thread.
So here I just want to point
out that Core Data isn't
using any thread local state.
And we're really interested in
having a single control flow.
We're not really as focused on
whether or not dispatch queues work
with multiple threads or how that's
happening underneath the covers.
So thread confinement is
pretty straightforward.
It's safe.
It's efficient.
The transactions are obviously all scoped
to the managed object context since
nothing else gets to interfere with it.
But it does put a burden on you
to manage all of these issues.
So in particular, tracking which context
goes with which thread,
potentially keeping extra threads
around for background tasks,
and then all of the special
behaviors that Core Data uses to
integrate with view controllers,
Cocoa binding, and other things,
these main thread behaviors,
undo management,
we're going to have to infer based on
whether or not you created the managed
object context on the main thread.
And those things are driven -- those we
call user events typically are driven
by the run loop on the application.
So in contrast to confinement,
the private queue concurrency type,
NSManagedObject maintains its
own private serialized queue,
and you can only use it on this queue.
And you do that by setting up blocks
as tasks and queuing them using perform
block and perform block and wait.
Now, within those blocks,
you can use the managed
object context API normally.
And I just want to really
emphasize that in this case,
the queue is private,
and you really shouldn't yank it
out and interact with it directly.
If you want to,
you can dispatch work to your
own queues with dispatch sync
at the end of those blocks.
There are a number of advantages to this.
It lets the managed object
context maintain which queue
it's using and handle whether
or not it's in the right state,
the right thread.
And other threads can easily interact
with that managed object context
by just calling perform block.
Unlike the concurrency -- the
confinement concurrency type,
those other threads really can't message
that managed object context at all.
And these can be created from any thread.
And the queues are going to be much more
efficient than keeping extra threads
lying around in the background to do
other tasks like background fetching.
And the third type is the
main queue concurrency type.
This is going to behave very similarly
to the private queue concurrency type,
only the queue is obviously
always the main thread.
And non-main threads can just call
perform block on that as well.
And it will integrate all of those
behaviors that I talked about,
undo management and other application
lifecycle events with the main run loop.
So what that means is when you
create a managed object context with
the main queue concurrency type,
your view controllers and other
things can just message it directly.
They don't have to know about all
these different perform block APIs.
And it's very easy for other tasks
that you have in the background to
just enqueue perform block on it and
have those then update view state.
So just sort of a diagram of what
I mean going on here is a background
thread can enqueue a block directly,
but the view controllers can just
start using managed object context API.
So in this way, Cocoa Bindings,
for instance,
doesn't know about concurrency
types or perform block,
but it can just work with the managed
object context the way it always has,
and you can have background threads or
other queues enqueue messages to happen
on the main thread context that way.
So I mentioned that we have
these notions of user events,
and for the main thread,
that's going to be tightly integrated
with the applications run loop.
But for context running
off the main thread,
either in a private queue
or in your own thread,
what I really mean here is Core Data is
going to defer a bunch of tasks
and then coalesce work later on.
So this is the coalescing
changes for notifications,
delete propagation,
setting up the undo groupings,
stuff like that.
And for the most part,
on background threads,
we consider this to be the time in
between calls to process pending changes.
So a couple of useful points for
all the concurrency types is that
managed objects are always owned by
their managed object context and that
object IDs are a great way to pass
references around between contexts
because they're going to be safe,
immutable value objects.
And something else that's a nice
point is that retain and release
are going to be thread safe on
all Core Data objects everywhere,
all the time, without exception.
They should be thread
safe on all Cocoa objects,
but your mileage may vary on that one.
But that means you can actually
retain a managed object
independently of its requirement
on the managed object context.
You just can't necessarily
use it directly.
So some good times for you to pass around
updates to other contexts or to update
the views are going to be with these
NS notifications that Core Data provides,
with the objectsDidChange notification
and the objectsDidSave notification.
And you can refresh other managed-object
contexts pretty easily after they
save with the merge changes from
context-did-save notification.
And here, I'd just like to call out that
you're responsible for the thread
safety of the managed-object
context receiving this message,
but you don't have to worry
about the notification data
that's being generated here.
Core data will manage the thread safety
of the contents of that notification.
So you just have to maintain the
rules that we've outlined in the past
on the receiver of the merge method.
And when you're inside some of
these notifications as an observer,
you can find some useful methods of
taking a look at the state of what's
changed in the managed objects.
Something that we added last release
was change values for current event,
which will give you the values
that changed since the previous
call to process pending changes.
And then some older methods,
change values and
committed values for keys,
will go back to the last
time the object was saved.
So now I'm going to go into a little
more depth about these perform
block and perform block and wait
methods that I mentioned earlier.
And our challenge here is to find a
way to pass work to other threads,
these managed object contexts running
on their own queues or the main queue,
and to sort of demarcate the
actual group of changes you
want to be coalesced together,
whether it's for an undo grouping or
validation or potentially to save,
as well as a convenient way to integrate
with all the other APIs on the platform.
And that's part of the
reason why we chose blocks.
So perform block is an asynchronous
request to enqueue this.
We consider its own
self-encapsulated user event,
and it also includes
an auto-release pool.
I really want to call out
that in all of these methods,
it is very illegal to throw an
exception outside of the block.
So if you do have exceptions,
please catch them and resolve
them inside the block.
And there's no support for re-entrancy
here in this perform block method.
And by that,
what I mean is when you call perform
block on a managed object context,
and within that perform block call,
you call perform block again,
you're basically just sort of
getting the same effect as if you
had iteratively called perform block.
So this is an asynchronous call,
and all it's doing is queuing
up attacks to be happened later.
So in contrast,
we also have perform block and wait.
This is synchronous.
It's very lightweight.
We don't consider it to
be any kind of event,
so there won't be any change
notifications or undo groupings
coalesced at this point in time.
It doesn't even include a release pool.
But what it does do is it
will support some re-entrancy.
So if you call perform block and wait
from within another perform block,
you will basically get them nested.
They'll be executed immediately
inline as opposed to enqueued later.
So this is very convenient as long as
you're just working with one managed
object context for these blocks.
So these APIs are very
fast and lightweight.
The perform block and weight
API is on the same order
magnitude as value for key,
for instance.
And the changes there from
Core Data's perspective are
going to be scoped by the block.
So however large or small you make
the block is going to be sort of
one self-encapsulated change set.
[Transcript missing]
So a simple example for how you
might use some of these APIs.
Here we have a context and it's
synchronously calling perform
block and wait to execute a fetch
request that's been captured by this
block from some code further up.
And if we don't have an error,
then we just ask the array of
managed objects to give us back its
object IDs and we return those out
of the block with a block variable.
So as I mentioned,
the queue is often going to be very
private to the managed object context,
and we don't want you
changing anything about it.
So if you need to,
and you're using your own queues,
as I would expect, you can just simply,
at the end of the work block that
you passed to managed object context,
enqueue another block back onto your
own queue as the callback to let it know
that it's done and process any results.
There are a number of other ways you
can coordinate with either your own
queues or other queues on the system.
Dispatch semaphores, for example,
are one way of doing that.
You can create a semaphore
and then at the end of the
block signal the semaphore.
And then in this particular code snippet,
the context is asynchronously performing
this block and the code that is calling
perform here is actually waiting
until that is done on the semaphore.
And then something else that I'd
sort of like to give a little
shout out are dispatch groups.
If you haven't used them,
they have some very
interesting behaviors.
And you can use them to organize
some pretty complex dependencies
between a variety of queues
and blocks between them.
So when you use dispatch group enter,
it's a little bit like
incrementing a retain count on
when the queue will be done.
And then the worker blocks can
call leave to decrement it.
And then when it ends up
getting back down to zero,
conceptually, dispatch group wait will
return or dispatch group notify
will enqueue a block that you
passed it onto your own queue.
So what this lets you do is
basically you don't actually
have to know in advance how many
waiters you want to float around.
You can just keep calling dispatch group
enter as you create more work or as you
decide to build in new dependencies and
then have them call dispatch group leave.
So this is a very simple example.
It's very similar to
the semaphore example.
This becomes more interesting when
you have more queues involved.
So now I'd like to move on
from concurrency to talk about
nested managed object contexts.
And in particular,
the reasons why you'd be interested
in nested managed object contexts are
going to be passing unsaved changes
around between contexts and implementing
something like an asynchronous save.
So in the past,
working with managed object contexts,
you can push and pull changes that have
been saved between contexts and use,
like, the merge notification to do that.
But passing unsaved changes between
contexts or having them really work with
unsaved changes can be very difficult.
And similarly,
it's difficult to sort of break up
the save operation to be asynchronous.
So here, for a nested context,
the parent contexts are going to sort
of act like the persistence store from
the perspective of the child context.
And the child context is going to
see the state of its objects as
they currently exist in the parent.
Children will then inherit
unsaved changes from their parent
whenever they fault things in
or they execute a fetch request.
And they'll marshal
their saves in memory.
So instead of saving back to disk,
the children will just turn around
and save to their parent context.
So it looks a little
bit something like this.
And the child doesn't really
know that it's not actually
talking to the persistent store.
It's just talking to a parent context.
And the behaviors are going
to be very analogous in terms
of the ways both saving works,
fetching works, and faulting.
So in this way,
peers that all inherit from the
same parent context can push
and pull changes between them.
And you can implement an asynchronous
save by setting up the parent context
to have a private queue and have the
child context typically on the main
thread save into the parent context and
then tell the parent context to save.
And one of the ways you might
leverage that is something
like a detail inspector.
The detail inspector will inherit the
view state as it is in your main context.
So for sharing on saved changes,
when you save the child context,
they'll just push up one level,
and then you can pull those changes
back down using a fetch or the
merge notification between child
contexts or calling refresh object.
It's the same way you would with
not nested managed object contexts.
For an asynchronous save,
when you save the child, like I said,
the parent context gets those changes and
holds on to them until it's told to save.
And the changes won't be written
to disk until the root most
parent context calls save.
So that would look something like
this here where a parent context has
a private queue concurrency type,
so it will execute
requests asynchronously,
and the child context gets set up.
It just creates a reference
to its parent context.
So when the child saves,
it pushes its changes up to the parent,
and then here it enqueues an
asynchronous block to tell the parent
that you want the parent to save.
For inheriting changes
in the Detail Inspector,
you just create a child context
for the Detail Inspector.
And if you decide to commit the
changes within the Inspector,
they'll get pushed back into the parent,
which is probably going to be
something like the main queue
context for your view state.
And any fetching you do in the
child context for the Inspector is
just going to incorporate the
current unsaved state in the parent.
And you don't even necessarily
have to do anything special.
If you decide to cancel
out of the Inspector,
you can just throw
away the child context.
So some important things to
remember is that saving with
nested context is only going to
push the changes up a single level,
but fetching is going to
go to the database and pull
data through all the levels.
Keep in mind, though, that in general,
core data isn't going to change
any objects that you already
have out from underneath you,
so if you fetch an object
that you already have,
you will see its previous state.
So say it's been dirtied,
we're not going to
blow away your changes.
We're simply going to keep in the fetch
results the reference to that object,
and you can call refresh object if
you want to get new values for it.
Object with ID on a child context
will pull from the fewest numbers of
levels necessary to get that data,
so it might go to the database
or it might only go up a
single level to the parent.
And all parent contexts must adopt one
of the two queue types for concurrency,
so they can either be a main
queue concurrency type or a
private queue concurrency type,
but we don't support them with the
legacy confinement concurrency type.
And child contexts depend
pretty heavily on their parents.
So the parent context really
should not do blocking operations
down on their children.
And by this,
the children are going to call
perform block and wait to do
a lot of operations for you.
So like, for instance,
execute fetch request on a child
context internally is going to turn
around and ask its parent context
to do part of the fetch and then
pull down those changes into itself.
So what this means is there's sort
of naturally a dependency there.
And if the parent context turn
around and call perform block
and wait on their children,
you'll basically end up deadlocking,
right, because you'll have all these
different queues trying to
synchronously wait on each other.
So in general,
you should imagine that requests
are going to flow up this hierarchy
of managed object contexts finally
to the database at the root.
And results are going to flow back down.
And now I'm going to bring
Melissa Turner on stage to
talk to you about performance.
[Transcript missing]
How do you know when you've
got a performance problem?
How do you figure out what to do when
you've got a performance problem?
Lots of questions.
The first stage when you're
starting to sit down in front
of your application and say,
"Okay, is this thing ready to
release to my customers?
Is it performant enough?
Are they going to be annoyed with me?
Are they going to file bad
reports on the Apple Store?
Are they going to give me five
stars?" Start asking yourself
questions about the application.
What environment does it run in,
and have I designed it to be
compatible with that environment?
What should it be doing,
and are the shoulds
and the dos compatible?
What kind of things do you need
to know about the environment?
Well, actually very little nowadays.
As long as you're using the
Apple Supply frameworks,
things like, you know, lib dispatch,
then we will take care of making sure
that you're doing things properly from,
say, the confinement standpoint.
But you will need to do things like
design for your network environment.
If you have an application that goes out,
use the NS incremental store
APIs to build a store that
talks to a web service.
You probably want to make sure
that whenever your user triggers
an action that will require
going out to that web service,
it doesn't block the main
UI of the application.
You'll need to think
about stuff like that.
That is a performance issue.
You'll need to think about what
is sufficient performance versus
what is optimal performance.
Sufficient is your application
gets up and gets the job done.
Optimal is it really wows your user
and allows you to spend more time
doing interesting things in your
application because you're not wasting
cycles doing things inefficiently.
And one crucial, crucial,
crucial point to remember is if
you're building an application
that supports multiple platforms,
test on the minimal configuration.
This cannot be emphasized enough
because if it works really well
on your minimal configuration,
it's going to blow people
away on all other platforms.
What should your application be doing?
You should know this.
You've written it.
You know things like, well,
it opens documents.
If you open a document,
there's very little way to get around it.
You need to do file system access
and load at least some of the data
so you can show it to the user.
That's what they're expecting.
The user instigates network access,
it's the same thing.
You should know when the user
is accessing the network and how
they're accessing the network so you
don't do things like accidentally,
you know, go out and fetch the
same piece of data three,
four or five times.
And you need to know what
kind of random processing your
user is likely to kick off.
Calculate me some transform on an image,
scale it, apply a filter,
do something interesting like that.
These are the things you know your
application can do and you should
expect to see those in your performance.
And then there's what
the application does do,
stuff that it does automatically.
Do you have a dataset that you need to
go out and check periodically to see if
there's new data on your Web service.
That kind of thing happens automatically.
You should build that
into your calculations.
Try not to do it when the users
kicked off that image transform.
Does it post notifications?
Try and do that in some unobtrusive way,
using our APIs that will make
it all happen nice and smoothly.
And you know,
if for some reason you want to
calculate 2,438th digit of pi,
try and do it at 3:00 in the morning
on a Friday when they're not likely
to be using their application.
How do you figure out what your
application does once you know
what you think it should be doing?
Well, measure it.
Measure, measure, measure, measure.
This is where everything starts.
Figure out where your application
is actually spending time so you
don't end up spending two weeks
optimizing what turns out to be
1% of your application's workload.
It's much better to spend
two weeks optimizing 50% of
your application's workload.
Start with the time
profiler in instruments.
This will tell you exactly where
your application is spending all
of its time method by method.
There's also the
Core Data template in instruments.
This will tell you when Core Data is
touching the file system.
We have a template that contains
instruments for fetching,
for saving,
for firing relationship faults,
and for when we have to go to the
database because the data that we're
looking for is not in the cache.
And there's also com.appled.cordata
SQL debug default,
and if you pass this to your
application when you launch it or
have it in your defaults right,
it will cause Cordata to print
out all of the SQL that's
being sent to the database.
You can have a look at that,
see what you're sending to the database,
look at the SQL that's being generated,
figure out if this is really the SQL that
should be generated in that case,
if you're doing too much work,
doing too little work,
doing too many trips to the database,
this kind of thing,
this default will tell you that.
And many of you have
probably heard this before,
because it's a very common
phrase in the real world.
If you're building
anything with your hands,
measure twice, cut once.
You cannot uncut a piece of lumber.
And that's less important in
the virtual world because,
well, we have SCM systems.
It's always possible to
revert to yesterday's build.
But the thing is,
you can't get back the time you have
invested going down that false path.
So, you know,
make sure you're actually fixing the
right thing before you go off and fix it.
So for the rest of this presentation,
I'm going to do a series of demos,
or I will be having my lovely
assistant do a series of demos
that are based around a table view.
This is primarily because table
views are easy to visualize.
If I say there's too
much data being loaded,
you can sort of get a
grasp of what that says.
If I say there's too little
data or the wrong data,
it's badly formed,
you can get an idea of what that means.
But the lessons are generally applicable
to anything that's going to be loading
and processing data from a store.
And just as a disclaimer,
the demos were specifically chosen
so that they have performance
issues that are visible on stage.
Any performance issues you
have in your apps will probably
be a little bit more subtle,
but they'll have the same basic patterns.
In the beginning, there is a table view.
And you know, your customers are not
going to pay you for this.
Because, you know,
that's not terribly interesting.
You need something.
And in my case, I went on vacation.
Those of you who are familiar
with this picture will probably
realize I was in Rome and that
this is a picture of the Colosseum,
and it's an architecture picture.
These are all pieces of information
that I want to build into an application
that displays my holiday photos.
So my first pass is going to be to take
all of those pieces of information that
I've got and combine those into an object
that I can use to back my table view.
Call it a photo object.
It's got a label.
This was taken in Rome.
It's got a blob that is the photo bytes,
some tags, architecture and coliseum,
and a timestamp when the photo was taken.
And at this point,
I'm going to bring Shane up on stage,
and he's going to see how well
that worked in a first pass.
Shane Hossel, Core Data Engineer Hello,
my name is Shane Hossel,
and I am a QA engineer
with the Core Data team.
All right.
So here we have the first
demo that Melissa mentioned.
This is version one of
the photos application.
And as you can see,
this is simply mapped over
a simple photo entity.
It's a single entity application.
And when we click on the record,
we get to see the photo.
So this works as promised.
Now what we're going to do is
we're going to hook this up to
Instruments and get some measurements.
Now for those of you who
haven't used Instruments before,
I'd like to show you what you
see when you first launch it.
What you'll notice here is you get a
-- what you'll notice here is you get a
sheet with all your instrument templates.
In our case,
we're going to use the iOS simulator.
Off to the left,
you have some groups which allow
you to target a specific platform,
either OS X, iOS, or the simulator.
Now, you want to keep in mind when
you're using the simulator
what Melissa mentioned earlier
about your environment.
This is actually a simulated application,
so while it looks like iOS,
it's running on our development hardware.
So we don't have the same constraints
that we would have if we were
using a device such as memory,
processor, and disk space.
You select the Core Data template,
you'll get the instruments
Melissa mentioned earlier,
Core Data fetches for our fetch activity,
the Core Data cache misses,
which gives us the file system
access during Core Data faulting
and the Core Data saves.
And of course, we want to add the time
profiler here as well.
Now, normally what you do here is
hook up your target application,
but I already have that set up,
so let me go right to that.
So let's run this in Instruments
and see if we can get any
interesting measurements.
And as you can see here on
the left when we launch,
you'll start to see live
measurements occurring.
It's taking a little bit here.
All right,
we had to wait for a few seconds,
but we still have our photos as promised.
And I'll do some scrolling real quick,
because I always like to make sure
everything scrolls nice and smooth.
Good.
So let's look at our Instruments
measurements real quick
and see what we have here.
We notice that there is actually some
delay when we launch this application.
And that's evident in the time
profiler as we can see the duration
of activity that occurred on launch.
Coincidentally,
our Core Data fetches shows us that
there's some duration going on and some
fetch activity that's taking place.
If we click on that,
we can see that the fetch count is 184.
We're actually loading all
these objects in at launch.
This isn't good.
If we had thousands and
thousands of photos,
our users would have to
wait for this to load.
So I'm going to file this up as a bug
and send it over to Melissa and see
if she can do something to fix this.
So when you want to optimize
your application's performance,
the first place you're probably
going to end up is at NSFetchRequest.
This is really ground zero for
your optimization because this is
where you tell your application
what data it should be loading.
There's all kinds of flags,
little things you can say,
specify the data.
A few of the interesting
ones are batching.
What's batching?
Well, you specify that you want to
return batches of objects.
This is primarily good for
underlying something like a
table view where you can scroll.
And Core Data will return
basically information about all
of the objects that need to be
displayed when the user wants them.
But it won't actually
fetch them in because,
well, the user may never get there.
So once the user scrolls
along in their scroll view,
Core Data will go out and fetch.
The data the user is
interested in seeing.
This can be a lot more efficient
than doing an upfront fetch because,
well, you don't fetch 20,000 photos,
especially if the user only
wants to see the first page.
If you're not using a table
view but you're using a
more page-based application,
something like, I don't know,
Google search results,
you probably want to think about
using fetch limits and offsets.
This allows you to page data
in and do batching yourself.
It's a little bit more time
efficient because you'll only
load a specific number of objects.
It's a little bit more complicated.
This is the dance of performance.
And you're always going to run
across this in every application
that you write that you try to
do performance optimization.
Every application is
going to be different.
Every application has
a different data set.
Every application has a different UI.
And you're going to need to make
different tradeoffs between memory use,
CPU use, code complexity.
There's no right answer here.
But here's some of the things you can do.
Some of your options.
You can use predicates to filter
down the number of objects that
are ever going to be returned.
Don't need to return a thousand photos
if your user only wants to see the ones
that were taken in Rome on February 2nd.
We support aggregate operators.
How many photos are there in the library?
What's the earliest photo taken?
What was the latest photo taken?
Or, you know,
jumping from photos to something else,
what's the average salary of all
employees working for a given manager?
We also support the grouping,
which is SQL's group by operator,
if you're familiar with how that works.
You can go find documentation of
how to use that in NSFetchRequest.h.
There's other things as well.
You can specify return types,
dictionary fetching if you want to,
that allow you to very precisely
target the information that's being
brought into your application so
that you really only need exactly the
information that your user wants to see.
But you know,
fetch requests will only get you so far.
From there, you really need to go,
Look at your schema and
figure out what it is.
Your application concept
is going to drive your UI.
I want to build a photos application.
Well, that tells me certain things.
I've got photos at some level.
I've got these large binary objects
that I'm going to have to put on screen.
I've got information about those photos.
I want probably a list or
some way of selecting them.
In our case,
we have a table view that allows users
to scroll through a large collection
of photos and figure out which one
they're actually interested in.
So the application concept drives the UI.
The UI, in turn, drives the schema.
There's no point in having the
labels for my photo if I never
actually display them to the user.
There's no point in having tags if
I never display them to the user.
But there is no one true schema.
I mean, you'll go out and research and
read a little bit about database,
building correct databases,
and you'll read things
like first normal form,
second normal form, fifth normal form.
And this tends to give the impression
that there is like a perfect schema.
And really there isn't.
The perfect schema is the
perfect schema for your app.
Combine your entities and relationships
in ways that make logical sense.
Put -- relate entities that are on
logical transitions as your storyboard
flows through your application.
And, you know,
don't try and follow ten joins
to get from page one to page two.
Just make that one join.
That makes more sense.
That's faster.
And faster is important.
Normalization.
I talked about normal forms.
This is where normalization comes in.
This is all about
reducing data duplication.
There's a lot of reasons for doing this,
all of which help with your performance.
This reduces the
possibility of data skew.
If you store the same piece of
information in 10 different locations,
then if you decide you want to
change that piece of information,
well, you have to go change it
in 10 different places.
It's easy to forget one.
You'll minimize the
amount of storage space.
If something is stored
in ten different places,
well,
it's stored in ten different places.
It's going to take ten times the amount
of space storing it in one place would.
Minimize memory usage.
That's the flip side of storage space.
Well,
we all want to make our applications
have a smaller memory footprint,
especially on an iOS device.
And it'll make your searching
faster because as you search
in something like SQLite,
well, all of the data for a given
record is contiguous in memory.
As you go through looking
at each individual record,
database -- well,
somebody has to load that and look at it.
The more stuff you have in that record,
the more memory we have to
load and the slower that is.
Over time, that can build up if you're
managing a large data set.
So how does normalization work?
Well, you start with something like this.
This is what we have in the database
for that schema we saw earlier.
And the first thing we see
is we got this column here,
and it's got two signifiers of problems.
There's multiple values in that field,
which is never a good sign.
Two, you see the same values being
repeated in multiple rows.
Well, that's also a bad sign.
If I move to Europe, move to England,
and decide that in order to
communicate with my new friends,
I want to change all of the
vacation tags to holiday tags,
I'm going to have to find every
single vacation tag and change it.
It's much better to move that off into
its own single table and unique them.
Make sure that family only appears once,
vacation is there once,
work is there once, and so on.
Work is there at once.
and at this point you're probably
expecting me to talk about tables
and keys and foreign keys and primary
keys and blah blah blah blah blah.
Core Data does all of that for you.
You create the relationships,
set them on the objects,
Core Data deals with all
of your key management.
That's the last I'll say about keys.
Okay, so now we've eliminated some
of the data in our table.
We see more duplicate data there.
But is that really duplicate data?
Not really,
because when you think about it,
the timestamp is an important piece
of information about a given photo,
and changing a timestamp on one
photo does not mean you want to
change it on every other photo.
So we're going to leave those ones alone.
Data Contiguity.
Photos are big, arbitrarily big,
arbitrarily small, have no idea.
It's not hugely efficient if you know
you're going to be searching on the
photo element to store that photo
object on the same table as the meta
information underlying the table view.
So we're going to split that off
onto its own separate table as well.
At this point,
I'm going to talk a little bit
about external data references,
which is about going one step further.
In normalization,
we move the data object off of the source
table and onto a destination table.
In Lion and iOS 5,
we went one step further and allowed
you to move it out of the database
file entirely by using what's called
an internal external data reference.
Like normalized objects,
these are best stored
on dedicated objects.
And because we can't read your mind
and tell when you've created an
object that you're done with it,
in order to free up
the underlying memory,
you're going to need
to refresh the object,
tell Core Data you're done with it,
so we can release the
memory that's being used.
So we had this schema originally,
and we decided that really didn't work.
There was a huge performance
hit when we loaded,
and sadness happened.
So we redesigned it,
and we're going to try this.
Shane, how'd that work?
Hello again.
I have the fresh version of
our Photos application here.
I already got it loaded
up in Instruments,
so let's take some measurements.
Pay particular attention to
the Core Data fetches when we
launch to see if we actually
got a performance gain
and fixed this bottleneck.
Oh, that was fast.
That's actually quite nice.
Let's make sure the application
still works when we click on a photo.
Indeed, it does.
You might notice over here on
the Core Data cache misses,
when I click on a photo,
we get some activity going on there.
Right there.
I have zooming enabled now.
I'm going to do some scrolling
really quick to make sure this
scrolls as we expect it to.
You might notice some Core Data fetches
going on while I'm scrolling as well,
right through here.
All right,
let's look at this instrumentation and
see what the measurements are telling us.
Of course, we have the fetch count here,
which is showing us it's still 184,
but the duration's a lot better.
So we're still loading all the photos in,
but we're only loading in the photos
-- we're not loading the photos,
we're still loading all the objects in,
but the photos are now a relation.
So we're not loading those in,
we're delaying the load
of those when we click,
and we can actually fire a cache miss,
and we can see that activity here.
Sorry, let me scroll in here.
Let me zoom in.
You might have noticed also,
when I was scrolling,
we had some other fetch
activity going on.
This is us loading that in as
needed on demand as Core Data is
fulfilling its promise.
So with that, now that we've fixed that
performance bottleneck,
it's time to add some features.
Of course,
as soon as the application gets fast,
we can add some new features.
So I'm going to put in a feature
request for probably a search bar,
and we'll see what Melissa can do for us.
So we'll see what Melissa can
do for us on that.
Melissa?
Okay.
Thank you.
So when we start talking about searching,
this is a good time to start
talking about denormalization.
Because one of the main things you're
going to denormalize is information
about the data in your database.
And why do you want to do this?
Well,
there's two types of denormalization.
One is attempting to minimize the
number of joins you have to do
by putting meta information about
relationships onto the source table.
Things like whether or not
there is an object on the
other end of a relationship,
whether how many objects are at
the other end of a relationship,
or aggregate information like, you know,
what's the average salary
for people who are directly
reporting to a given manager.
You also want to minimize
repeated transforms.
And what does that mean?
Well,
remember I said earlier that you want to
eliminate duplicate data where you can,
and that skew is bad,
and having same or similar
bits in multiple places can
make it more painful to update.
There's a caveat to this,
and that's if there is some CPU-heavy
process that has to be done repeatedly,
say, for example, you're searching,
you want to not have to do that
every time your user searches.
You want to instead put your data into
some form that's more easily searchable,
it's canonical.
What do I mean by that?
Well, I want to build my application.
Shane has filed a bug and said, well,
you know, searching.
I have like 184 pictures.
It's hard to find the
one I'm interested in.
I want to be able to search by tag.
Okay.
That's nice.
I want to know how many tags
are on a given photo first.
I'm going to do that.
I also want -- because, well,
Shane thought searching
was neat and I thought,
you know, we're graphical creatures,
we like searching for things visually,
I want to add a thumbnail to the
master view so you can get a sense of
which picture it is you're looking at
as you scroll through the table view.
And that's transform.
I don't want to have to calculate the
thumbnail images from the main image
data every single time the user scrolls.
It's going to be something they do a lot.
They're going to be scrolling
through this scroll view regularly.
I don't want to have to calculate that
thumbnail every single time they scroll.
So I'm going to precalculate that
and put that in the database.
And here's where that there is no
one true schema thing comes in.
I can put this in a couple
of different places.
I can put this on the
data object because,
well, I mean, it's a piece of data.
It's photo information.
But, you know, I can also put it -- I can
To minimize relationship fault firing,
I can also put it on the photo object,
which is what I'm going to do.
And now that search
optimization I talked about,
there's a few ways,
a few things you need to think about
and consider when you're starting to
build search into your application.
The first is, well,
what is searching for your user?
There's two ways to
actually implement it.
The first way is to put everything
in the view and let the user filter
out stuff they're not interested in.
The second way is to put nothing
in the view and let the user filter
in stuff they're interested in.
Why are these different?
Why do you care?
Well,
we saw what kind of a performance hit
we had in the first version of our
application when we loaded 184 objects.
It can be expensive to load everything
and put it into the search view simply
so your user can filter things out.
So, you know,
if you know your user's going to be
working with really large data sets,
help them filter in.
There's also the option of,
do you want to do searches you type,
do a new search with every
keystroke the user gives you,
and pull up incremental data sets?
Or do you want to let them
enter an entire search term
and then return those results?
At that point,
it comes down to your environment.
If you're using an SQLite
database on the local disk,
searches you type is going
to be relatively fast.
If you have an NS incremental
store talking to a web service,
And your user's running on an edge phone,
well, you've got one of two choices.
Either do search on completion
or make sure that if you're
doing searches you type,
that that search does not
block the user interface,
because they're going to want to continue
typing while you're waiting for the first
batch of search results to come back.
I mentioned canonicalizing strings.
Well, what does that mean?
This is where I got off track earlier.
Your strings into a very
simple pre-processed form.
In the same way that I don't want
to have to calculate the thumbnail
in order to display it every
single time the user scrolls,
I don't want to have to do all of
the case and diacritic stripping
that's necessary in order to get
an intuitive to the user search.
They want to type in family.
They don't care what case
the tag was in originally.
They just want to type family.
They want to type vacation.
Along these lines,
normalize because case and diacritic
insensitivity is important.
But it also lets you use begins
with instead of contains.
Most importantly, it allows you to avoid
wildcards in a lot of cases.
Regex is not your user's friend.
For example,
if you have -- you want to do type as you
go searching in standard search field,
you might think as your first pass, oh,
I want my labels -- I want everything
that's going to label case and
diacritically like starting with red.
No, really.
You actually want a
normalized search string.
You want to do search with
begins with normalized red.
This is much, much faster.
We can turn this into something
in SQLite that will be at least
an order of magnitude faster.
then the original search.
Well, you say, well,
I actually want matching
at the beginning and end.
Find me things that are substrings.
We can do substrings too.
That is again faster than matches.
Okay, okay, you really,
really want matches.
I give.
Doesn't mean you can't still normalize
it and fire up the regex engine to
look at the pre-normalized strings.
This is still going to be faster because
I'm not going to have to do additional
passes across that string to denormalize
and strip case and diacritic information.
Try and do those last, though, please.
Why?
Because, well,
SQLite doesn't have a query optimizer.
This is part of knowing your environment.
There isn't a query optimizer,
which means you're going to have to
manually optimize your predicates.
Think about, you know--
Eliminating largest group-- building
your predicates such that they will
eliminate the largest group first.
You're now also have to trade off
group size and comparison speed.
And as I said,
put the matches operator last.
For example,
if you're looking for a search
string containing something
plus a time-to-time comparison,
Your computer is really,
really good at doing math.
Put the timestamps first.
That'll minimize the group
that you actually need to
do the substring work on.
If you've got tag search strings, well,
that's really better done
as an uncorrelated fetch.
And we've got syntax that
allows you to specify,
do an uncorrelated fetch
on a separate table,
and then do the relationship join.
There's lots of really neat
stuff in the predicates.
Go have a look at the BNF.
It's really fascinating.
How does it work?
Well, if I want to search for all
photos taken in Rome in February,
well, I've got two ways I can
start looking at that.
I can look for photos that were in
Rome or photos that were in February.
As I said,
computers are really good at math,
so February is the first
column I'm going to look at.
And that's going to dump
two rows right off the bat.
And now it's much faster when
I go through and do my string
operations on the labels.
So after all of that, we had a model,
we did some search optimization,
normalized our data in the database,
and now our model looks
a lot more like this.
And I'm going to bring Shane up
once more to have a final look and
see what we've managed to make.
Instead of using Instruments,
we're going to use the
Core Data SQL debug string,
or default,
that Melissa had mentioned earlier.
And I'm simply going to set
that up as an argument passed on
launch to our demo application.
And here's version three of our demo,
hot off the presses.
We've got some nice thumbnails.
And of course, I get to see the photo
when I click on it.
That's important.
Functionality still works.
And you might notice here,
we're already getting some--
Information logged to our
console in particular,
we have a SQL statement.
So this is really nice because this
gives us a window into what's going on.
There's some other annotations
that occur here as well.
The connection fetch time as well
as the total fetch execution time.
So I'm going to use the total fetch
execution time to look at the difference
between some of our search predicates.
We're running right now with
a Matches search predicate,
and I'm going to do a search for
Dog real quick.
We already have this set up,
so we have a nice cute
dog we can show you.
And I'm searching for the first character
of this that I started the search on.
Let me zoom in for you guys here.
I have zooming enabled now.
And in particular, we can see we do have
our select statement,
and we are doing a matches on this.
And in particular,
I'm going to look at the
total fetch execution time,
which is .0385 seconds.
So as Melissa mentioned earlier,
we can probably use a
faster search predicate.
So we're going to do the begins with.
Oh,
and this is no longer case insensitive.
Run this and we'll do
the same search for dog.
Let me zoom in for you again.
And the moment of truth here.
Proof is in the pudding,
if I can get that scroll correctly.
Our total fetch execution
time is now .0023 seconds.
So I'm sure our users are
going to appreciate this.
Looks good.
Thank you, Melissa.
I'll bring Melissa back up on stage
now to talk about the rest of this.
So, you know,
knocking an order of magnitude off a
search doesn't look that impressive
when you've got 184 objects in the
database and the search is returning in,
you know,
[Transcript missing]
And, you know,
on the minimal configuration you expect
your users to be using to make sure that
the performance there is acceptable,
use some of the tricks
we showed you to make
To squeak every last
second out of the app,
so you can add new and
interesting features that make
your app a lot more interesting.
The difference between a
three-star app and a five-star app.
And I've talked a lot about
specifically targeting the
information you're interested in,
only loading the information
you're interested in.
Equally important is getting rid of the
stuff you're no longer interested in.
Use auto release pools judiciously.
Use -- that will purge
batches of objects.
Use manage object context,
refresh object,
merge changes to turn objects back
into faults when you're done with them.
That allows Core Data to free
the underlying attribute and
relationship information.
If you're done with a
whole bunch of objects,
you had a detail view inspector,
the kind of thing
Ben talked about earlier,
up on your application,
you're now done with it,
call reset on the context,
and that will free all of the
resources on all of the objects
that were in that context.
So this is what we went over today.
Ben talked about concurrency,
nested contexts.
I talked about performance,
schema design, and search optimization.
And now I want to talk for something
we would love you to do for us.
Bugs.
We don't know about
bugs unless you tell us.
I mean, we are not psychic.
We don't see your user crash reports.
We don't see the e-mails
people send to you.
If you don't tell us there's
a problem with our code,
we can't fix it.
So please file bugs.
Bugs will be fixed faster if
you give us steps to reproduce.
Or a sample project.
Best case is I tried to do
-- I started my application,
I did this, this, and this.
I expected it to do this.
It actually did this.
That gives us a very clear case
of how you're seeing the problem,
what problem you're seeing,
what you're expecting,
and this gives us all the information
we need to try and figure out
whether that's actually a bug or
we need to improve our documentation.
Bugreport.apple.com.
Use it.
Frequently.
Often.
I suppose that's the same meaning.
Also use it for feature requests.
If there's something that
you think Core Data should
be doing that it doesn't do,
bugreport.apple.com.
Enhancement requests.
If you run across a performance issue,
we love when you submit
performance issues,
especially if you give
us instruments choices.
Hi, I did this in my application,
and Core Data was really
slow and it looked like this.
Can you make it faster?
Also documentation requests.
If there's something that's missing,
something you think is confusing,
bugreport.apple.com.
Makes the crocodile smile.
If you need information,
there's always Mike Jurowicz.
He's our technology evangelist.
There's also Cocoa.apple.com--
cocofeedback@apple.com.
There's lots of documentation
at developer.apple.com.
And there's always the Apple forums.
We hang out there when we're
not being crushed by workloads.
We've got a Core Data session this
afternoon using iCloud with Core Data.